Welcome to the Empirical Cycling Podcast. I'm your host, Kolie Moore. Thank you, everybody, for listening. And of course, if you're new here, please subscribe to the podcast if you like what you're hearing. And of course, if you've been subscribed and you do like what you're hearing, please share the podcast. That goes a long way. Thank you all for all of that. And of course, a nice iTunes rating or review wherever you listen to podcasts goes a long way as well, I am told. So thank you all for all of that. We have a very nice rating. But of course, I'd rather have everybody reach out to me and tell me that the advice that we're giving them is working and helping.
and that they are happier and faster. That is my absolute favorite thing. And if you want to do it on social media too, that's great. Thank you so much for all of that as well. So yeah, we're an ad-free podcast. If you'd like to donate to the show and keep the lights on here, you can do so at empiricalcycling.com slash donate. We've got some show notes up on the website and some relevant links for our guests today. And of course, if you have any coaching...
or consultation inquiries, you can reach out to me at empiricalcyclingatgmail.com. Of course, we are always taking on clients. We coach people at every single level of the sport, literally the whole way through. So yeah, we can, and pretty much every discipline except BMX. So if you are looking for a coach, please reach out. And if you would like to hire us for a consultation, we can do that too. We can answer all of your questions. We can take a look at your training files. We can suggest directions for you to go.
ways for you to modify your training or just, you know, blank slate kind of stuff. We can answer all your questions or if you want to hire us for just hanging out and talking biochemistry for an hour or more, I'm happy to do that. So that's empiricalcycling at gmail.com, of course. And if you have any questions or comments, let me know or let me know on the Instagram where I am asking questions for our podcast guests or just for me and Kyle when we've got a Kyle episode.
and check that out in the stories at Empirical Cycling on Instagram and please stay on topic when I prompt a topic. We had a lot of good questions today. Some of them were a little off topic, more about performance and weight and today we really wanted to stick to dieting because our guest is a performance dietitian. She's really excellent. She's got a...
You know, a degree in chemical engineering and sports nutrition. She has a PhD in applies exercise physiology. She's a registered dietitian, and you've heard her on the podcast before. It is, of course, Namrita Brooke. And she's fantastic to work with. I highly recommend her to everybody who is looking for somebody, especially who has experience with cycling. You know, you wouldn't, well, maybe you would, but it's hard to find a good dietitian.
who has cycling experience. And Namrita and I talked about this a little bit off air, but it's difficult for some people to realize just how much cyclists need to eat. And Namrita does it herself, and she does running, and of course, she does Inside Sports Nutrition on Instagram, which you should all follow. They also do AMAs up in the stories like I do on the weekends. Not every weekend, but when they do.
It's a great opportunity to ask a question, ask a specific question, or if you have a lot more to talk about, please reach out to them, reach out to Namrita, namritabrook at gmail.com and tell her I sent you and you'd like to talk about nutrition coaching for a little bit. And yeah, so today, one of the things that we really wanted to dig into is weight loss for cyclists and performance.
There's a lot of – in my experience coaching and consulting with people, there's a lot of kind of false starts and a lot of like very fast diets or fad diets that work really well for a little bit and then they go really badly. That gets into yo-yo dieting and stuff. So we also talk about where to start. Where to start with a healthy, long-term.
Goal-Oriented way to look at dieting and losing weight, should that be something that you would like to do in your cycling? And if you are not entirely sure, that is, of course, worth talking to your coach about, or, you know, thinking long-term about your happiness about, or if you have any questions, just reach out to me, and I'm happy to talk about that with you as well. And, of course, we're going to talk about performance markers while losing weight. We're going to talk about, you know, kind of the difference between
Fat Weight and Water Weight and How to Tell What You're Doing, although we definitely did talk about that to a large degree in the last Wattstock episode on the relationship between size and power. So if you haven't heard that episode after this, I suggest you go listen to it, especially towards the end, we kind of talk more about this.
But yeah, we, yeah, Namrita and I, we, we go pretty deep in this episode, we go pretty long, and I hope it's a good conversation that everybody takes something positive away from. And of course, you get to hear about me and Namrita's working relationship as well, and how we kind of work with people who I am coaching that she is doing nutrition for, et cetera, et cetera. So yeah, there's a lot more.
And I think that we cover pretty much everything that everybody wanted to see covered. So yeah, we'll get to your listener questions at the end of the episode. And yeah, I hope everybody enjoys the conversation as much as I did having it. So we'll see you on the other side. I think it's actually really interesting to keep getting listener questions for that reason, because I get to figure out, I get to hear what people are listening to.
and kind of what the trends are, because I don't follow them. I don't know any of that, but yeah, but here's a trend that never goes out of style, which is why is losing weight while cycling so difficult? Yeah, I mean, I think in general exercise has effects on appetite and desire to eat.
You know, there's been like this U-shaped curve with just a little bit of exercise doesn't stimulate appetite really as much, but moderate exercise will. And then on the other end of the U, you know, heavy exercise, like if you're doing a race, for example, you might not have an appetite after. So I think that's part of it. And then, of course, like that's the average.
and Generalizations, but everyone's probably going to, imagine that, respond differently to different stimuli based on just themselves and their genetics and however their hormones are regulated and releasing, but also everything else that's going on. At some point, when you're riding a lot and you're racing a lot, your body
Your body really wants to maintain homeostasis or improve itself and have more energy stores because of our evolutionary history. And so when we're doing all that stuff, even when we miss the appetite after the race, like a lot of the listener questions I got were basically, why am I so hungry on my rest days? You know, because there's that up and down of it. And so when it comes to dieting and weight loss,
You know, the cravings kind of seem to have a big effect, don't they? They do. And, you know, the rest day question is really good because it's real. And we don't, we think that we're like this perfect system where everything's in real time. And so, yeah, we're writing a lot. We should.
Be Hungry Enough to Eat Right Then Because We Also Know That's Good We Need The Energy Then But Then We Also Think That If It's A Rest Day Or A Rest Week We Shouldn't Be Hungry And It's Like Whoa Why Am I Hungry But I Mean We're Catching Up So When We Think About You Know How Training Works And How Progression Works And You Know It's We Are Providing The Stimulus And Then Adapting And Improving While We Rest And So
That takes energy. So, you know, when you think about, like, all the metabolic processes that are involved with just, like, sleeping or, I mean, not, like, recovering, just, like, you know, resting all day. And then you think about all those adaptations that have to take place depending on, you know, what you've done for training that day or that week. That's a lot. And your body, again, like, is going to send the signals.
that it needs more energy to do all that. So it's expected. And I think anyone who's trying to over-restrict on rest days, you're not really doing yourself any favors. I mean, the whole purpose of rest is to kind of reset and rebuild. And without the energy in the system to do that...
You're not going to be able to. Yeah. As effectively, at least. I mean, I was actually just reading last night. I kind of went down this rabbit hole because I was thinking how much muscle protein synthesis actually does take place after endurance exercise because, you know, we're building mitochondria, we're building mitochondrial proteins, you know, we're restocking glycogen stores, we're, you know, building probably hopefully new capillaries and stuff like that. So there should be, you know, probably not as much as, you know, heavy strength training.
But a fair amount, and it turns out that that's actually the case, and you're right, it does take a lot of energy to do these processes. And, you know, you work directly with one of my clients who, speaking of being hungry on rest days, some people just can't even eat enough to catch up on a regular training day. Like, he'll go out for, you know, a 7,500 kilojoule ride.
And how are you going to eat that much plus your body's basic needs plus whatever, you know, your exercise, like, you know, your non-cycling, moving around kind of energy expenditure? Like, there's no way you're going to do it. Yeah, it's true. And he's a great example of, like, why, you know, you can and you should use those rest days.
To catch up. Now, that doesn't mean that you're eating the same. It doesn't mean that you're eating gummies and bars all day. But, you know, you still need the energy and the energy can come from more nutritious sources of food. I'm not going to say good and bad foods, but you know what I mean. Yeah. So I think before we really start to dive into this,
What are weight loss mechanisms? Because it seems like, like I just saw in the New York Times, they posted something on Instagram, like their NYT, like wellness section or something like that. It was like, you know, modern diet, whatever. And one of them was energy balance doesn't matter for weight loss. It's more about hormones. And everything that, you know, your basic physics would tell us is that that's not true.
Where are we at in terms of like weight loss mechanisms and how much influence do hormones actually have? Yeah, that's a good question. And surprisingly, like, so misunderstood. I mean, it used to be so simple, right? We need Kyle on this because I'm not like, anyway, I'll try to explain it the best I can. Yeah, it comes down to energy balance. It really is that simple.
Why, like, when you think about humans and behavior, it's not that simple because of hormones. So hormones influence our desire to eat and our desire to move. And those are the two big things that influence energy balance. But at the end of the day, it really is coming down to, are you eating more than you're expending? Or are you eating less than you're expending? Right? I mean, you're...
You understand that, right? Oh, I do, yeah. So I'm just wondering if I can explain that better. Also, because I think part of it is a lot of people are like, oh, insulin and fats and whatever. And I think insulin gets a bad rap a lot of the time. People don't quite understand its role, especially when we're talking about healthy people versus pre-diabetic people and diabetic people.
like there's a, there's a, you know, differences in like, you know, obesity and all that kind of stuff. And there's a wide range of health and metabolic problems that happen with that. But I think something that should probably generally be addressed in media more is that if you are like a healthy person and you're exercising, you don't need to worry about this nearly so much unless your doctor says you need to. Sure. And I mean, there's definitely people with, you know,
Current or forming metabolic diseases that do need to worry about it. But generally speaking, one, insulin does get a bad rap. I mean, insulin is an essential anabolic hormone. We would never be able to train and adapt and perform without it. So the thing is, is like, you know, this model was proposed that, you know, if you're eating a lot of sugar and fat, it's insulin's fault that you're, you know, all of a sudden gaining weight now.
But it's really, you have to look at the foods that stimulate the desire to eat. So, you know, I think a couple years ago, there was all these studies on ultra-processed foods, and that's what's causing people to eat and to become insulin resistant. I mean, these are not athletes, of course. But you need to think about, one, you know, energy balance. It's key. And then insulin also, you know, has a time and place.
Everything's going to stimulate the release of insulin to some degree, but we need it. That's not the problem. The problem is us or people overeating certain things that they don't need, and then they're all of a sudden in excess of energy balance and an energy surplus. Yeah, I remember I think I was like 19, and it was one of my first days on a construction site, which I was doing for my summer job.
and we went to McDonald's for lunch and I ate like a burger and fries and had a soda and I was still hungry afterwards. Like I was full, but my body had this, cause I was used to eating like normal healthy foods and I was like, oh God, I, where are all my micronutrients? Like where's, where's the salad? Like where's, where's the fiber? Like I, this, this, it filled me up, but at the same time my body was like, we're missing something.
We're missing a lot. Yeah, it's kind of like how we used to joke about the second stomach for ice cream. I mean, there's always room for ice cream or dessert, right? Absolutely. Yeah, so I think it, you know, one, people don't realize how much they're eating too. So especially if you're eating a lot of ultra processed foods, processed foods, you know, high energy density foods, it might not seem like a lot of volume of food, but
But it adds up, and, you know, somehow getting an objective look at that can really give you some feedback there, you know, and it might be surprising. I mean, the reason people are not losing weight when they think they're trying is they're eating more than they think they are, or they're not accounting for, like, you know.
Mindless Snacking, or just like eating a little bit of something here and there. And typically, those are energy-dense foods, so they're going to add up. Yeah. Well, and you also mentioned something that I think has a large influence, which is you said that hormones influence our desire to move. Yeah. And actually moving.
around, like when you're not exercising actually can have a very large influence on your energy expenditure. And so if you are restricting food a lot, chances are like you're just going to like be a couch potato and that's going to have a really large effect. So when it comes to like where do people start, like if somebody wants to start to lose weight as an endurance athlete, how do we start with
Knowing how much somebody should eat in general, like what's your basal metabolic rate, how much non-exercise energy are you expending, and how much are you expending on the bike? Where can somebody get a good idea of where to start and then how to adjust as they go? Yeah, so if you follow physique coaches and nutritionists, they're going to tell you that the best way to figure out
Figure This Out is to figure out what your maintenance level is. And yes, there are equations out there that you can use to estimate, and we'll talk about those in a second. But the best thing to do is, if your weight has been stable for a little while, record everything and see where those calories land. I mean, take an average of that, and that's essentially your...
Level of Maintenance Calories. And so, if you want to ignore hormones right now and just go back to true energy balance and really make it simple, you just need to eat less than that. And so, let's say, you know, you eat 2,500 calories a day right now and you're, like most cyclists, a creature of habit and so you're, put training aside for a second, if you're, if you've been eating that, you know, and your weight has been stable at, let's say,
150 pounds. That's your maintenance to keep it at 150. Now, if you want to gain weight, you're going to have to eat more than 2,500 calories. If you want to lose weight, you need to eat less than that. That doesn't mean every day. That means kind of like over the course of the week, you want to be in somewhat of a deficit to allow you to lose weight.
That's, I don't know, for some reason that concept seems hard for people, and I think it's because tracking is cumbersome, and it is, there's no way around that. I mean, it's so much easier to get data when you're riding your bike with everything we have available. But when it comes to what you're eating, it's so, I mean, you eat all day long, and then to track everything, you know, everything's an estimate from you eyeballing it and, you know.
If you're not going to weigh everything in grams, you know, it's a complete estimate. There's a lot of error there. You can go into MyFitnessPal and find the matching food. There's probably error there. And it's very, very time-consuming and can lead to a destructive path too. So I don't typically recommend people are tracking all the time. Some people love it. Generally, I think it's a good idea to do it for a very short term to get an idea of
where you're starting from and get an objective estimate of what your intake is so you have that starting point. Yeah. Yeah, I agree because it's, well, to bring up carpentry again, like one of the things that we always said in carpentry is what's better than actually getting, you know, measuring something is you actually scribe it to what you're doing. It's like, instead of just having like a 90 degree cut, you put it up to the thing and you go, okay, this is exactly the shape that it's going to have. Like, you don't estimate, you actually,
Like, look at it. You don't measure, you know, in theory with your tape measure, you go, okay, this is exactly what it is. And so that's pretty much what we're talking about with this tracking. And I agree it's hard because when I'm dieting, I weigh everything and I make sure that it's nice and simple. I've got four meals a day. I know exactly how much I need when I exercise. Like, I've got it done with science now, finally. But it's one of those things that...
It is difficult. And then, you know, then there's on the bike. So I think one of the things that a lot of people have noticed is on the bike, some days you're hungrier than the kilojoule expenditure would say you are. So like you go out and you do, you know, 10 one minute hill reps or something like that, and you get back and you're not that hungry at first. And then either later that day or the next day, you're ravenous.
and you're going, man, I think I ate way more than the whatever 800 kilojoules I spent on that ride. So how do we manage for that and how good are, actually maybe the more basic question is how good are power meters at estimating our actual energy expenditure? Yeah. Okay. Before I answer that, I want to go back to one thing, you know, when you were talking about weighing your food and getting an idea of that.
So one thing that I think is kind of a good in-between spot, because again, yeah, we love numbers and we love data, but you know, someone said this and I loved it, but the numbers that we're talking about in terms of like grams and calories and these ranges are so tight, but the power of food is so large. So like people spend years and years and years and unfortunately so much of their
Lives and Their Careers, like focusing on these grams and like just not enjoying the whole experience. So something I think, you know, might be a better strategy for people is same concept applies of energy balance and maintenance calories. So paying attention to, you know, it is good to be a creature of habit in this case. So you're typically your meals kind of look the same, like you said, four meals a day, maybe switching out.
Carb Sources, Protein Sources, and all that, but essentially the same structure of the meal. So then just figure out where you can reduce a little bit. So if you cut back a little bit without tracking anything, you're creating that deficit from eating. And we'll talk about this more, I hope, but there's two ways to create a deficit, or three, really. One is eat less, one is expend more energy, and the third is...
is to do both. So come back a little bit and then, you know, move a little more. I hate the old, like, eat less, move more thing. That just doesn't work. But okay, to your question now, yeah, there's going to be, again, for that reason, that different types of exercise and different intensities and durations will probably stimulate your appetite differently. And that's okay. So I think, like, the whole...
thing is, just be okay with that, you know, kind of, it doesn't really matter from, you know, we don't have to be so specific. It's good to be intentional, but, like, if you're, if you're, like, so just, like, worked from that workout that you're, like, gonna puke if you eat anything and, like, it's revolting, well, just give yourself a little time and eat later, and you don't have to overdo it, but plan to, you know,
Have some food prepared, plan out what you're going to eat ahead so you're not just like eating a whole bag of chips, but and then eat, you know, every few hours. And if you feel like you overate for the effort, you probably needed it. And so maybe you are still catching up from the previous days or the previous weeks. And it's good to not fight that too much because our bodies are smart. And so part of this is like knowing.
When to listen to your body, and when to tell your brain, like, no, I don't need to eat right now. Like, I'm eating because I'm stressed or I'm bored.
So that's kind of a hard thing for people to figure out. I mean, I think it's going to be harder for some than others. Yeah. Well, I think that is actually a very large challenge for a lot of cyclists where, you know, a lot of cyclists are very, very organized type A people, especially when it comes to like, you know, those who track and measure food all the time. And they're going, well, these numbers tell me I need to do X, Y, Z. And, you know, yet they're...
You know, very, very, very hungry. And they're like, well, the numbers tell me I need to do this. Like, I cannot tell you the number of people who have come to me and said, well, I was losing weight. I put my, you know, I put my body weight and height into this, you know, BMR calculator. And then I added, you know, kilojoules on top of that from burn, from, you know, what I was doing riding. And, and I've been yo-yo dieting is basically what happens for, you know, sometimes months or sometimes years. Yeah.
Yeah, it's, again, like, you can kind of parallel it to training and giving someone a workout and saying, okay, I want you to do 20 minutes between, like, 250 and 280 watts, and if they're at, like, 249, they're, like, all distraught about it. Yeah.
You're not feeling it on the day, and so you don't need to be at, you know, 260 watts. It's okay. And if you're a little bit more hungry, you don't, you might be fighting a cold, you might have just worked really hard this training cycle, or, you know.
Power meters are pretty accurate, I think, with estimating the energy burn, more so than heart rate monitor would be, and more so than anything else I can think, besides going into a lab and getting indirect calorimetry done. So, yeah, I mean, I think you can use that, but what do you do with that information? I mean, it's, I think, if you look at really successful athletes who have long careers, they are very good at listening to their bodies.
You know, training and output is one, but also, you know, eating when you're hungry is another one. And I think, you know, I was going to kind of wrap up with this, but I'll say it now. I think it really comes down to good decision making. So like learning to listen to your body, knowing when it's okay to not eat versus like letting yourself eat because you're truly hungry and you need it. Similar to, you know, knowing when it's...
better to push through on the bike versus pull back and rest and making good decisions. And some of that happens, you know, it's best to have some sort of knowledge of food and macronutrients and micronutrients and what foods are better. I mean, I think if you asked anyone, they would say, yeah, I know fruits and vegetables are good for me and I know that, you know, burgers and fries are not. But even beyond that, having some knowledge of what foods have.
You know, the macros and the micros that you need. And then, yeah, I forget the question. Yeah, no, it's okay. Yeah, because I was, I was going to follow up with, with the, the kilojoule thing on the power meters, because, like, that's also an estimate. Because people are typically, on average, about 20.
20-ish, 25% efficient, but we don't really know, like you said, until you get into a lab and you measure it with indirect calorimetry and then you can figure out your efficiency, but efficiency is different at different power ranges and stuff like that. So it's still all just an estimate and you need to have that practical in-out kind of like, okay, these days maybe I eat a little extra to hunger and that's okay, these days I don't. And so that brings us to
Kind of my first question on dieting, which is, you know, kind of a dumb one, but I think a lot of people are, would be curious about this. So how effective are, like, food rules for, like, certain food groups? Like, avoid processed sugar, like, cut out all fats, like, you know, are high-carb diets, like, you know, unhealthy and should we avoid carbs and go low-carb, high-fat or something like that? Like, how well do these work typically for endurance athletes?
Yeah, so I'll go back to, you mentioned yo-yo dieting. I mean, in the end, I think that everything needs to be sustainable when it comes to nutrition and diet. And so, you know, as a coach, I, you know, we have intentional periods of doing, you know, different sort of types of work and different, you know, training stresses, but
But with diet, especially off the bike, let's say, just like general diet, which is really what matters. I mean, you're not going to lose weight by really over-controlling your during-ride intake. We're talking about off the bike here. And those habits, they need to be sustainable. Again, if you care about doing well for longer than a season.
or Longer Than A Few Years, if you want a long career of either racing or just riding your bike and being healthy, then the habits need to be sustainable. So from that standpoint, I don't think food rules make sense. And trust me, I have like before I ever did this, I have done all the diets and yeah, they work temporarily, but they're not, I don't care who you are, they're not sustainable. Now, if you have a reason.
to have to remove something from your diet, that's fine. Like, if you can't eat gluten, there are plenty of foods you can still eat without having gluten, gluten-free substitutions, and then there's like a whole bunch of other foods that you can eat. So that's fine. You know, people go to like intermittent fasting protocols or I'm cutting out dairy and I'm cutting out sugar and I'm cutting out X, Y, Z, but
You know, is it sustainable? And you have to ask yourself why you're doing it. Are you doing it to reduce calories? If so, there's probably a better way. And it's not really like, that's easy to do. The hard part is changing your habits and learning your body and your body's needs and allowing yourself to eat when you need to. When people over-restrict, they end up
Binging Later, at some point, whether it's later in the day or later in the season, you know, they can diet for a few weeks or months and have great progress and have great races, but then it's not sustainable, so they rebound, and then it's so much harder doing it that way. Yeah. Yeah, I've seen that a whole bunch, too, where especially when someone doesn't give themselves some time to
You know, if they've been successful in some weight loss, and then they decide, all right, well, I've lost, you know, 10 or 15 pounds, like I want to lose 30. And they just keep pushing and pushing and pushing. And so you end up in a...
you know energy deficit for I don't know six months or a year or something like that like it that kind of stuff can rebound too so that's kind of what you're going into with you know being sustainable is and having I would say from my perspective part of that is having a good periodization scheme for like when to diet and when not to in a season so in your experience when is the most when's the easiest and most practical time to diet and when is the worst time in season to diet yeah so
I mean, depending on how long your mid-season or your off-season break is or your transition phase after you're done racing for the year, I mean, if you're only taking a couple weeks off, that's not a good time. So you might just want to wait until base training. But if you're taking a few months off, let's say you only race cyclocross, you know, you have a good time of the year where you're not doing...
I mean, you might be doing a lot of, you know, lower intensity riding, but your race season is not, you know, till the fall, let's say. So, you have a little more room to work with then. I mean, ultimately, you don't want to be doing it when you're getting close to your peak phase or even really build phase, if you want to use those, you know, terms. But I would say off-season or base training are best. The more time you give yourself, the better.
I agree. So what would be a reasonable loss rate per week and per cycle, or per base season? Let's say you've got two or three months where the riding intensity is going to be pretty low and it's going to be easier to run a deficit. So instead of thinking, oh, how much could I possibly lose or how much do I want to lose in the long term?
Like, you know, two years ago, I was 30 pounds heavier than I am now. And I could not lose 30 pounds in, like, three months, you know? So what would be, like, a reasonable loss rate, like, per week or per month? Or what's the high end and what's the low end, do you think? Yeah. I mean, obviously, you know, it depends. So the smaller you are and the less you have to lose, the slower the rate should be.
If you're starting out and you're pretty new or you've somehow like gained a bunch of weight, you know, after taking a lot of time off or you are truly like you have a very, you know, high percentage of body fat and you have a lot of weight you could lose, that's great. You can start out at a faster rate. So I always say on average, like half a pound to a pound a week would probably be like a general.
Average there. Now, again, if you fall in that category where you do have a lot to lose, you could maybe lose two pounds a week. But again, it's so hard to say. And I think, you know, ultimately, one of my rules of thumb is lose slowly eating as many calories as possible, especially like for an endurance athlete who is training. So that deficit might only be 200 to 250 calories a day, and you might only be losing
a quarter pound a week, maybe, or a half a pound. But if you're losing and you can keep it off and you can still train, that's what matters. Yeah, so there was a study, and I know you've seen this, but it was a resistance training study, not an endurance training study, but with a deficit of over 500 calories a day. That's when people started losing.
Lean Mass, even though they were resistance training. But with a deficit that was fewer than 500 calories a day, they were able to still improve strength. And you know, I mean, this is a different topic, but there's multiple ways to improve strength. And it's not all about gaining lean mass. But, you know, they were still able to improve strength markers and not lose.
Too Much or Like Barely Maintained. I don't know the exact details, but they, you know, they didn't lose a lot of lean mass. But that was 500 calories a day. And the thing, the key thing there, I think, one is, yes, it's a resistance training study, but two, they achieved that deficit from only energy intake, I believe. Now, going back to the three ways to accomplish the deficit, you know, and reduce what you eat, how much you eat, increase how much you expend or you train and move around in general.
You know, the combination of the two is the best. And so I think probably the hormonal, how should I say it, like drive, yeah, the drive to eat after, you know, depending on how you create that deficit is going to be different. And it may be different for endurance sports than strength training.
Yeah, I mean, I noticed doing both endurance and strength training these days, I am way hungrier after a moderate two-hour ride than I am after a really hard two-hour gym session. Yeah, so yeah, there's definitely a, you know, in theory, like burning roughly the same amount of calories and, you know, needing to eat roughly the same, it's, yeah, it's quite different.
How about some rough macro guidelines? Because I think a lot of people are actually very curious, how much protein do I need? How much fats do I need? And how many carbs do I need? And where should I take calories from? And should I always think about it all in terms of per unit body mass? Or how would we kind of consider these guidelines?
Yeah, I always think about it per unit of body mass. So let's just use kilograms because that's, I think, the most common. Now, one thing, and this is, you know, this kind of messes some people up, especially if you have a higher body fat percentage and you know your lean body mass, you can base these numbers based on your lean body mass. The leaner you are, it doesn't matter. You can just use total body mass. So for carbohydrates,
General Range for Endurance Athletes is 3 to 12 grams per kilogram of your body weight per day. And that includes, I don't know why this can be confusing, but it includes what you're taking in on the bike. It's total calories throughout the day. It's not just breakfast, lunch, and dinner, but, and like, ride calories are free. I mean, it's all included. So you might look at 10 grams of carbs per kilogram per day for a long ride and be like, that is way too many carbs. But then if you're like,
Oh, well, I'm actually taking in 90 grams of carbs an hour on the bike. You know, it's not that much. For protein, since we're talking specifically about weight loss and fat loss here, a higher protein intake than what's typically recommended is probably better. So like 2 to 2.
Four, I know it's very specific, grams per kilogram is what I've seen recommended. So what's average on protein for endurance athletes? Like 1.75-ish? Yeah, that's like totally average, yeah. I mean, the range is like 1.6 to 1.8, yeah, grams per kilogram per day. And then, so if you're older and you're dealing with
That thing called anabolic resistance, and it's debatable like how powerful that really is, especially if you've been an athlete all your life, it may be less of a factor, but if you're older, I definitely would recommend being on the higher end, and if you're older and trying to lose body fat, then I absolutely recommend eating on the high end of protein, so that 2.4 grams per kilogram per day. What about fats? Yeah, so that's the tricky one.
The most important thing really, and I tell this to everybody, is to meet your daily energy needs. So we have these like very specific ranges in the literature for carbs and protein and for fat, you know, you can search a bunch and it's hard to come up with something other than make sure that your fat calories are at least 20% of your total daily calories. So you can go about it that way. I would say kind of the minimum range.
is about a gram of fat per kilogram of your body weight per day, but that's really low, I think. I was going to say, like, that sounds high to me. But it depends how much you weigh, I guess, yeah. Yeah, because I know in a lot of bodybuilding circles, it's like, it's around like 0.6 grams per kilogram is more typical. So actually, here's a good question is, what are some
Subjective signs that you are low on a macronutrient. Because the one I know right away for hormones is because fats are so necessary for the proper function of membranes and stuff like that, but solubility of vitamins is a big one, and also hormones, like sex hormones. They're very, very important. So one of the things that I pretty much hear everybody in bodybuilding circles talk about, at least, is if your fats are too low, your sex drive tanks.
or if your total energy is too low, your sex drive tank. So that's a big one to watch out for with that apparently. So what other signs do we have for like, you know, low fats, low proteins, low carbs? So disrupted sleep, I think. Mood. So, okay, with sleep, like if you're waking up hungry or you're kind of tossing and turning and are having a harder time falling asleep or waking up more frequently, you know, you could be hungry.
Mood, so if you find yourself like real irritable, you know, kind of more snappy than usual, I think this sense of energy and fatigue is important too, so if you're feeling less energetic than usual or you're feeling more fatigued than usual off the bike and then on the bike if your RPE is higher than
you would normally expect it to be, I think, and not just like one day, you know, repeatedly. So you can kind of see a pattern with RPE being higher than expected. So those, I think, are some subjective, or yeah, you're just hungry, you know, if you're like, if you get to the end of the day and you're one of those people that's like, after dinner, looking through the pantry or the freezer to find something to eat, you're probably not eating enough of something. And it's hard to say what, I mean, that's why, you know,
At some point, logging and tracking is a good idea because it's shocking how many people I work with think, oh, I don't need to do that. My workouts are going fine. And then eventually something happens and I'm like, have you actually taken a look at what you're eating? No, okay, let's do that. And then they're like, oh my gosh, I thought I was eating so many more carbs than I am.
It's funny, and I don't know why this has happened, but people tend to overeat the fat calories and undereat the carbs, which if you're not training and you're eating healthy sources of food, that's not that big a deal. But when you're trying to train and you need those carbohydrates, then that's not good. Your performance and your energy and all of that is going to suffer at some point.
Well, I think it's, there's also a little irony in there too, because I think a lot of people expect that, you know, oh, I eat plenty of carbs. And I've had a lot of clients over the years where I see workouts going badly. And I'm like, well, how much did you eat? Like, how are you sleeping? I was distressed and everything's fine. And I'm like, well, they're definitely not overtraining looking at this, you know, looking at this schedule. So I'm sure.
It's your food. So like, how much food did you eat? And then they go through it. And I'm like, oh, you want to double that. They're like, what? Or like, you know, the busy day at work, like somebody's always like skipping lunch or something like that. Like, you know, there's a lot of ways to be low on carbs. And I think that that surprises a lot of people. And it surprised me and still surprises me a lot of the time when I see it. Yeah. And it goes beyond.
Just eating during your ride or, you know, eating oatmeal before your ride and then hardly eating anything throughout the day or, you know, just eating salads and soup and stuff or like chicken and broccoli. I mean, to get, when you, again, look at the recommendations for the range for carb intake, you can't really get that in one or two meals. If you're training hard, I mean, you know, one of your athletes is going to have to be eating.
Some sort of carbs at every meal plus during rides. Yeah. Yeah, he sends me pictures sometimes of his food and I'm just like, man, I wish I could eat that much. Maybe I should quit coaching and just go ride my bike all the time. All right, so while here's, okay, so here's the big one. While losing weight, how can we tell the difference between losing actual body fat and
Just Losing Water Weight. Like, how can we tell if the number on the scale going down is the right kind of weight to be dropping? Yeah. So if it happens very quickly, that's water. So more than like a half a pound a week, more than a pound, half a pound week or something like that? Yeah, starting out, I would say. Yeah. So when you're in a calorie deficit, you're going to lose some muscle, some fat.
And with the muscle, you're going to lose some glycogen and some water. But I would say have a plan to increase the likelihood that you're losing mostly fat and minimizing the loss of everything else. And so, you know, that plan would be what I said earlier, you know, lose as slowly as possible eating as many calories as possible.
That way, you're able to do your training to still be in an anabolic state when you need to minimize protein breakdown, not just from muscle, but everywhere. Make good food choices, so more whole foods versus ultra-processed foods. Eat on the higher end of protein intake again to try to preserve what muscle lean body mass that you can.
Sleep, and then meeting your carbohydrate needs, especially around your ride. So before, during, and after, if you're still getting adequate carbohydrates, hopefully you're still, and you're eating enough protein, hopefully you're maintaining the lean mass and you're maintaining the glycogen storage. If you're drinking enough, then you're maintaining your total body hydration.
And so all those strategies make it hopefully more likely that what you're losing is body fat. But it's a slower process. And so, you know, patience is rewarded there. Paying too much attention to the fluctuations on the scale can be difficult, you know, for some people. But it's normal. I mean, those water fluctuations based on, you know.
How much you're recovering, how much damage you did, how much water fluid retention you have, and how much glycogen you have in the system. And, you know, each gram of carbohydrate will store, like, three grams of water or something. So, yeah, you're going to be heavier with that. But knowing that is good. And not having a scale that just gives you weight, because that can drive you crazy. You might never see progress and just give up before, you know.
Before it's time, but a good BIA scale. So impedance. It's helpful. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I've got a Tanita and everybody's, everybody says, and they're right that, you know, you shouldn't really believe the, you know, body fat thing. But, you know, if you try, if you watch a day to day, it doesn't go up and down more than about a percent.
And so, you know, if you track that over the long term, you should kind of see it go in the direction you want, while also at the same time, you know, hopefully maintaining lean mass and not losing too much of that. But, you know, I think it's funny because a lot of people who crash diet typically tend to lose, like they do lose fat, right?
That's definitely a thing. But you also lose a lot of muscle mass and you lose a lot of water from between both. And one of the things that I've noticed over the years is that we can actually track how well this is going with performance on the bike. That is actually one of my favorite markers for if a diet's too hard for a lot of people. Because a lot of people will say, okay, I'm going to just run a small deficit.
a daily deficit, you know, three, four or 500 kg a day or something like that. It's like, or, you know, calories. Okay, sure, whatever. And then if they start having really bad workouts in a couple days, and I've adjusted the workouts expecting a small deficit, that's a sign that they're way overdoing it. So all the stuff I've, you know, because I know I'm one of the few podcasts you listen to, and that's flattering, by the way. Thank you.
But I know that one of the things I always harp on is RPE and the power numbers always matching and making sure that your FTP effectively is not dropping or anything like that. And watching your PMAX, your peak power, all this kind of stuff is so good to watch while you are trying to lose weight. Because if it starts to really have negative effects on that kind of training, which is going to have effects on your performance down the line, yeah, you're...
It's way too much. Yeah, and that's, I think, why, I mean, honestly, I think that's why this relationship works well, because you're watching that, you know, I'm providing some guidance. I don't even really want to say recommendations. I'm providing guidance. I mean, it's up to the athlete to, I always say, if you're more hungry than this, eat.
But you're really, you know, giving that final check and saying, okay, this is what I'm expecting or not. And I like when you put into someone's training peaks, no dieting, and there'll be like a three-week block. Because, yeah, like, you know, and athlete notes are really telling, too, for many reasons, but you can see, you know, as a coach, you can see the trend.
in data, and you can see the trend in their perception. And at some point, you have to know when to, you know, just turn it off and eat and, you know, kind of rebuild and rebound. Yeah. Yeah. So for everybody wondering, you know, exactly what Namrita means by how this relationship works, is so for the clients who want the service.
Namrita's not part of Empirical Cycling, by the way. She's just, you know, someone that we all love to work with. And I've heard nothing but brave reviews from you, other than one person who didn't like that you wanted him to eat more vegetables. Beans. Yeah, he was like, all these leafy greens, I'm so gassy. And I'm like, oh, I don't care. She's right. So I programmed the training.
And around the training, based on that, you go in a day-to-day program, a rough guide to macronutrients and, you know, total, total calories. And so, yeah, you know, I think we've been, you know, working like this for two or three, three years now? Yeah, gosh, probably. That's crazy. Yeah, I think probably, you know, 10 or 15, maybe 20 clients by now, something like that.
I am not a weight loss expert. I am not a weight loss dietician. I think that I and we have found a system that really can work and helps athletes, but it takes all three. So I think the point is it takes a good coaching team and it takes a motivated athlete, but also a smart and intuitive athlete too.
Yeah, yeah. And some of the questions that, you know, some of our co-clients ask of me and or you are, they're phenomenal. You know, and I read those questions and I'm like, yeah, I want to know the answer too. Yeah, definitely. Yeah, no, it's great. And I think that's also one of the other reasons that it works well is because, you know, you're not, you know, you're not dogmatic about anything. And, you know, like you said, you're not, you know, like a weight loss.
Dietitian, you're here when it needs to be. It's not like, okay, it's time for maintenance and performance, and you're like, well, that's not my bag, I don't know what to do with this. You know what to do with that just as well as you know what to do with all the other stuff. Yeah, and when it comes to weight loss and dieting, I think there's so few, it's almost like a topic no one wants to touch, and I am in no way
You know, advocating for anyone to lose weight to be faster. I truly, like, I don't really believe that's the case. I mean, you need to eat to be strong and fast. But if you're looking at, you know, the context of athletic performance, we're going to do everything we can to improve somebody's performance, if that's what they're, you know, wanting or paying us to do and working towards. And so part of that is...
Being intentional with your nutrition and your diet and periodizing it with your periodized training plan. And it's not, you know, we're not going through any like really aggressive phases of, you know, calorie restriction or anything like that. I mean, if that's what you're looking for, then I'm probably not the person, you know, that you need to seek out. But, you know, there's no like fad.
approaches or, you know, fasting diets or anything like that. So yeah, it's all about what the athlete needs at the right time to help them improve their performance with the idea that we want them to be in the sport for a long time. Yeah.
Yeah, and I always appreciate, you know, when you, you know, get in touch with me and, you know, because I'll recommend you to somebody and then, you know, it can sometimes be a couple weeks or even a couple months before they get in touch with you and then kind of get the whole thing rolling. And then you, you know, you'll get in touch with me like, hey, this is what this person's thinking. This is kind of what we talked about. Do you think that this is reasonable for their goals? And, you know, you're because you're always checking with, you know, me, the, you know, workouts coach.
Does this all make sense? And I think, you know, on the whole, it really works because we're focused on that athlete rather than, you know, focused on like a rigid set of rules, as Patrick would say. And I think that's something that I've seen probably way too much in the last, you know, couple of years working with higher level clients is...
You know, a lot of people who have a say in how a lot of clients are performing aren't looking for the client's feedback. Like, they're not looking for that athletic feedback a lot of the time. They're just saying, oh, you need to do this, you need to do this, and shut up and just do it. And they're like, hey, but I, you know, I've got this gut problem, or I can't have this food, or I'm on high FODMAP or something like that.
You know, they don't care. But, you know, we care to a very large degree. Absolutely. I mean, that's a good coach right there. And I feel bad, badly, you know, if you're an athlete that is just being told what to do and not listen to, then find a new coach if possible. Yeah. And so, speaking of people who don't get listened to as much as they should, what can we...
Do about weight loss for women? Because I think that there are probably a lot of women-specific needs with dieting and hormones, and especially around the cycle, that are probably not addressed as much as they should be. Yeah. So one thing that's really important, and I said this earlier, just in the context of any athlete, is being okay with listening to your body when you're hungry.
And of course with everything, you know, tired and all that, but specifically around food, like when you are hungry, you should be eating. And so if you're a pre-menopausal female, not on oral contraceptives and have, you know, a normal, whatever normal is for you cycle, after ovulation, before you have your period, you're probably going to experience
Some type of increased hunger. At what point? I mean, it probably really depends on you as a person, but it's, you know, I always think it's good to pay attention to, to kind of correlate, you know, where you are in your cycle. So track your cycle dates when you notice, you know, usually it's correlated with like not feeling super energetic.
You kind of just want to like hunker down or maybe rest a little more, do lower intensity rides, and you might find yourself craving things like chocolate. Like there's a reason for that. It's totally normal. But if you look at research, it's one, you're right. There's not a ton of it, especially in female athletes. But generally speaking, in that phase between ovulation and menstruation, there's an increase in energy intake, just ad libitum.
Eat More. But resting energy expenditure also goes up by quite a bit. I mean, I think maybe on average 4% to 6%, but like the range is 2% to 12%, you know, higher REE during that phase. That's quite a range. Yeah. So, and then if you're training on top of that, yeah, if you're training on top of that, it's now you know why you're more hungry. So I think, again,
listening to that and being okay with that, so there's a reason for it. You know, female athletes shouldn't have to feel badly about that or like kind of beat themselves up about it because then you get into where you do have your period and
In theory, that part of your cycle, you should be really powerful and really going. So if you're under-fueling and trying to over-restrict heading into that, that's not really doing you any favors from a performance standpoint when you get into the early follicular phase. Yeah. And in my experience in coaching women and dating women, of course, especially around that time.
There can often be water retention too. And so the number on the scale can get scary for some women. Like my girlfriend now, she'll get on the scale around that time and she's like, oh my God, I put on a pound. I'm like, just stop, just ignore it. You know this happens to you every month. Yeah, well, and so that's the thing, like a pound really, I mean, she's lucky.
You can gain five to seven pounds in that part of your cycle. But again, like that's why tracking is so important. So being able to provide an explanation for it is so helpful. And that's something that I've realized to you. I mean, I never used to track anything. But now it's like, oh, that's why I just want to eat like chocolate chips out of the bag. Or that's why, you know, I feel.
Puffy or Heavy or like I don't feel like doing my intervals or something and so you like you go on your calendar and you're like that that completely makes sense so just deal with it like use it to your advantage you know store some extra glycogen and then you go into the next phase of your cycle like feeling really good yeah yeah and that's one of the reasons that I ask all of all of my female clients to track their cycle or at least you know put a note in training peaks like cycle day one
So at least I've got a sense of how long it's been in the pattern that we're getting into. And also I think the cycle is useful for women with tracking energy deficit too, because I think I've heard you say, I'm not entirely sure, but I've definitely heard other people say that it's like a canary in a coal mine. Like if you lose your cycle, that is a sign that you've been under fueling for way too long.
I think you said that, because I don't ever make analogies. I'm really bad at those. But yes, it was our conversation. Yeah. Unfortunately, by the time it gets to that point, it's like, you're pretty far in to low energy availability. So you don't really want to get to that point. That's why when we talked about all those subjective metrics earlier, you know,
Having a good coach to help give an objective point of view to monitor those trends is really important or beneficial. I know not everyone can have a coach, but not everyone wants one. But if you're doing this on your own, be honest with yourself and journal those things. Write it in your Training Peaks notes, and that way you can identify a pattern before you lose your period or miss it for a month.
Yeah, and I remember one of my earliest clients, she didn't have her period for months, and she never told me, and I didn't know I should be asking, and I didn't know that it was appropriate for me to be asking, and even to this day, though, I'll still say, if you don't want to have this information available to me, don't, it's fine, I understand, but this is what you need to look for for your own health.
Yeah, no, it's so good that you do that, and it's so good that you are talking about it on a podcast, so other coaches know how important it is to do the same, and other, you know, female athletes know that it's okay to talk about, and it's becoming more normalized, it's probably not normal yet, but it's becoming more so, which is good, because
It is definitely a part of performance. And I know that, like, we can be very performance-oriented, but if you don't have your health, then you don't have any performance. So it really, like, yes, you can probably race for a couple years without having a period. Yeah, of course you can. I mean, people do it all the time. But you're going to pay for that someday. And I don't know how. I mean, you can't predict how, but...
You can make some guesses, and none of them are going to be good, and all of them are going to require you to take a step back to some degree. What's a typical range of unhealthy responses to missing your period for years? Oh, man. I mean, bone issues, you know, stress fractures. That's really the big one. But I think there's also a lot of like...
Deeper, probably, like, eating and mental, like, eating disorder-related and mental health issues that go along with that. But I think, yeah, illness, injury are two of the big ones. And then, you know, we definitely know from the whole, like, all the female triad athlete, that bone triad research, that bone injuries and such are really problematic.
You know, unfortunately, if you have irregular periods or you, you know, miss them for a while, it can be corrected by restoring energy availability. But, you know, like you said, like female athletes are kind of lucky that they have that marker for men. And I'm going to apologize to a couple of men I worked with very early in my career for, you know.
Probably not telling them to eat enough, because, like, men can definitely end up in low energy availability, but they don't have a period to tell them, you know, to lose and to tell them that they are. Yeah, so it can take years and years and just, like, a lot of frustration and it ending up being, like, overtraining, I guess. You know, which true overtraining is not that common. If you're overtrained, there's a problem.
I'm going to guess that most of the time it's probably fueling related or dietary related. Yeah. I mean, I think part of it can be workout related because if you're doing high intensity workouts, like five, six days a week for a long time, like I did this way early on.
I read Training Racing with a Power Meter and I thought, well, if these are the plans that they have in the back of the book, then I can do twice as many workouts and I'll get twice as fast. I was that stupid. And to some degree, I still am, which is, sorry, everybody. But you're doing it for science. You're like experimenting. I was experimenting. I wanted to see if it would work because in theory, it should work, right? And it did not work. And that's a training regimen where no matter how much you eat.
You are not going to recover from that kind of workload. So, yeah, there's definitely a large component of both. Because I've heard people say, you know, there's no such thing as overtraining, there's only under fueling. It's like, all right, you try to fuel yourself properly doing, you know, six days of high-intensity workouts a week. Yeah, no, no, you're totally right. I mean, I think it's absolutely possible. I think for most people, they don't want, I mean, I'm talking about like general population here.
They probably won't or don't want to work that hard, but they're focusing on the wrong thing. They're focusing on maybe, you know, cycling for weight loss and their yo-yo dieting or in these massive caloric deficits for whole seasons. And, you know, like you said, for six months at a time, maybe. Yeah. Yeah. And I've actually had clients who said, I'm just going to ride more and I'm going to lose weight that way.
Probably go back to working with that dietician that you had before. And they're like, no, no, I'm just going to go ride more. And then after, I was like, okay, cool. Ride more. Just hit these workouts, but ride as much as you want. Let's see how this works for you. Because for some people, that can work fine. For this particular person, at the end of it, they said, oh, no, I've gained another three kilos. Yeah. Because riding a lot just made them hungry. They could eat. I know. It's so hard, isn't it? I mean.
It's hard whether you're working with a dietician or a coach or not, but I do think that having the guidance and it's almost like the permission, right? Like, okay, now I'm being told I need to eat more because she or he has a bigger picture in mind and this is how we're going to do it and I'm going to trust, I'm going to trust, you know, kind of put the trust in them.
And obviously, like, you need to see results at some point if you're doing it. But yeah, to do it on your own is especially hard. Because again, like, going back to what I said earlier about, you know, the numbers and tracking everything, there's such small ranges, but that, you know, those hormones and the drive and the desire to eat are, they're big. And then you throw in like...
We haven't even talked about sleep yet, but you throw in like not sleeping and kind of chronic stress and exercise as a stress. It's very hard. Yeah, extremely hard. Especially, you know, if you're running like a small caloric deficit per day, that's something that you could easily snack back with like a spoonful of Nutella. Yeah. It's so easy. All right. So you want to get to a couple of listener questions? Sure. All right.
And the, well, some of these will be quick. Some of these will be a little less quick. So how do we find an ideal race weight? And somebody else later pretty much says, if you just keep riding, will your body weight just kind of fall in line to where it quote unquote should be? So, like for instance, when I was racing,
Um, as an endurance athlete, uh, my, I was kind of just doing whatever and my body weight was typically like 167 to 170 was like pretty normal for me. Um, and I was probably 15% body fat, but you know, is in your opinion, and this is just an opinion, obviously, uh, cause I've got an opinion on this too. Um, is, was that like my quote unquote right body weight for like best performances?
Probably close. I mean, I do think that there's I mean, it's obviously like we start with something and it's, you know, in our genes, it's genetic. So if someone like a lot of people just will just like cure a body fat percentage because, you know, that's what all their
Buddies are, or competitors are, or that's what they've read online, like, oh, a male athlete should be 6-8% body fat, you know. It's kind of like the watt per kilogram charts, like, that's what they're comparing themselves to, but I think whoever came up with those body fat, recommended body fats for different types of athletes, you know, that was a big mistake, because...
It's not all about that number. It's just like, it's not all about your 20-minute power. It's not all about what your percent body fat is. But that being said, like, if someone comes to me and says, okay, I am 21% body fat and I want to get down to 12, I'm going to ask them, like, have they ever been around 12%? Like, were they 12% to 14% for 10 years and then, you know, they stopped riding and, you know, gained a bunch of weight?
So then maybe, yeah, we could try to get closer. But I always ask, like, where have they been before? If they've never been close to that, then not a chance. I mean, it just, that's too much. Like, I don't want to take that on, and it's not reasonable. So let's find alternatives. And, you know, once they start, they eventually figure that out themselves. So I don't always say that's...
Not Gonna Happen. I'll say, okay, how about we start with this, you know, process goal? Like, let's try to get you to 18% body fat. And then they're totally happy with that, and they figure it out on their own. They're like, oh, I'm super fast now, and like, I feel good, I feel strong. I don't think I want to do this anymore. I don't want to get any lower. So, do people figure it out? And, yeah, I think so. I mean, I think you have to look at the whole...
and this is why having a coach like you helps too because you're providing them that input like no your numbers are looking really good we have you where we want you to be or like I'm really impressed let's keep doing this but don't lose anymore and that might be at 14% body fat for someone and not the 8 that they wanted and I think it takes less time to figure out when they have some guidance and
Some objective, you know, feedback there versus doing it on their own again. Yeah. And one thing I'll add to that, too, is I usually tell most people who are either amateur athletes or who are, you know, budding professional athletes, like people who are very talented who want to, you know, get a pro contract one day.
I usually tell them, or maybe we can add a third version, which is like somebody who's, you know, wants to do like the full gamut training, like, you know, I've only been kind of casually training and, Cole, I want you to train me to the best of your abilities. You know, one of the first questions they usually ask me is, should I lose weight? And most of the time, I say, unless your doctor tells you you absolutely need to, no. Stick to the training for now.
Like, one of my clients now is, you know, in the last category there, you know, wants to go pro someday. And he was like, you know, I'm two kilos, three kilos heavier than I was at this time last year. Should I be worried? I'm like, no, train for performance. Like, I swear to God, you're about to get a big bump.
and he got a 30-watt bump of FTP thereabouts and I'm like, see, I told you, if you hadn't been eating well, this probably wouldn't have happened because you wouldn't have made it through that really hard period of training. And so, you know, in the long term, okay, yeah, we'll talk about it. Maybe you want to lose that kind of stuff because I think if you really want to go to that level, you know, there is...
Probably an ideal low body fat percentage, because especially for heat venting, that's a big one. I'm pretty well insulated, and I have a hard time in the summer. Especially if you're going to be a crit racer or something like that, like bacon in the hot sun on a Sunday afternoon in the middle of the summer, July, that can be a really hard time for somebody at 18%, 20% body fat. Yeah. Yeah. No, and I totally agree.
Again, people make this into such a touchy topic, but when you're looking at performance, no, not everyone is racing to win or even to make it onto a pro team, but when you are, yes, it's something you should consider.
Like you said, you know, it shouldn't be what you're immediately focusing on. So it's kind of like when someone comes to you and they're like, okay, yeah, you're right. I need to improve my endurance. Okay, so I should do all my rides fasted, right? And you're like, no, you should do lots of volume and, you know, do the workouts that I'm giving you and do them well. But it's kind of like the same thing. So don't like focus on the weight loss part, focus on the training.
Trust your coach and the training plan. And then, let's say, you know, you have a period of time where it makes sense. Then you can kind of, like, make it a focus as long as it's far enough out. Like, again, this all has to be planned out. But sometimes, a lot of times, it just takes care of itself. So you do the riding, you're doing the training. Again, like, at some point...
Your appetite's probably not going to be as high that you're going to want to eat back everything that you've burned, so you're going to naturally create an energy deficit. Yeah. But you need to be, yeah. I was going to say, I'm sure you've worked with a lot of people whose goal is actually to put on weight, too, because there are definitely a lot of people out there, and I bet cycling has probably some sort of, you know.
Weeding Out Process, Some Selection Bias, where there are probably a lot of clients who are naturally, you know, have a really hard time putting on weight. So I'm sure that that's a big part sometimes too. It is. To be honest, nowadays, everyone wants to lose weight. And I think it's probably an artifact of like coming out of the pandemic too.
and Lifestyle Changes. But yeah, especially with young athletes and juniors, gaining weight is a big deal. And they're growing so fast and they're trying to train. So yeah, you have to be intentional both ways. There's healthier ways to gain weight. There's healthier ways to lose weight. And then you still have to be realistic about the rate and then the timing. Obviously, gaining weight is a little bit easier.
Most people are okay with eating more. But yeah, I think the timing is really what's important. Yeah. Next question is, thoughts on the use of GLP-1 agonists? No, I...
I would never recommend this. I mean, if this is something that you need, then you need to be working with your physician. Yeah, I have the same answer. Like, all weight loss drugs, like ephedra or whatever, they're terrible. Just, like, there's no shortcuts for this stuff. It's like the same reason that there's no exercise and a pill. Like, it's just not going to work. Exactly. I mean, again, like focusing on the wrong things, right? Yeah, yeah.
So, why can't we, next question, by the way, why can't we do one day per week with a massive deficit and then the rest normally? Like, if you want to lose a pound a week, why don't you just have a 3,500 kilojoule deficit or 3,500 calorie deficit on one day a week and then eat normally for the rest? I mean, you can.
I don't know. Like, I've never tried that, but I guess that's what some people try to do with the time-restricted eating and intermittent fasting. So I think that depending on who you are, you would respond differently to that. And so if that seems to work for you, it's not really a strategy that's that common, I mean, that I've seen.
But yeah, even with intermittent fasting and time-restricted eating, it's like, okay, going back to performance nutrition and what I keep saying about timing and being intentional with your intake, it's very difficult to do that if you're following these rules. Again, and I see that as another form of a rule or a food rule. It's like an eating rule. So, okay, I am not eating today.
Um, I'm only eating, like, or drinking celery juice or something. Like, I don't know. It's, why? Like, can you just learn how to eat when you're hungry? I know it's easier said than done, but, um, yeah, like, you eat a little bit less then, so you don't binge later. Yeah, and I think, like, if you miss out on eating for a day, it basically sets you up for a binge.
I think so. I mean, there's definitely people who, like, will argue that, and again, people are probably, you know, you find all these cases where, like, people do these crazy things, yet they still have amazing, you know, resumes, and they train a lot, and they race really well, but it's not the norm, so. Yeah. Let's see.
Does watts per kilo matter for crit racing? Well, it's not really a diet question, but yeah, kind of. Like I mentioned before about extra insulation on a hot crit day, that's a rough one. And also accelerating. Force equals mass times acceleration. We've got force, mass, and acceleration in there. So if you're accelerating out of a lot of corners, it could definitely have an impact.
I think we've talked about it on the podcast before. So, oh, why are carbs per hour not scaled to FTP or kilojoules? Or let's put it another way. Why are recommendations on the bike not scaled to body weight? Yeah, so that's a good question. So carbs, okay, one, I'm going to say this.
This isn't like truly on topic. And if you're trying to, if you submitted this question and you're trying to lose weight by not eating carbs during your ride or not eating as many as are recommended, then you're thinking about it wrong. That's such a small part of your day. So like really big picture, focus on your overall intake, improving habits and creating the deficit and fueling your ride so you can actually keep riding.
and getting faster. So, but her, yeah, like research doesn't show that it's body weight dependent in terms of actual utilization when they're measuring expired gases. So it really depends on how much you can, regardless of your body size, take in, digest and absorb and
Uptake into muscle and oxidize for fuel to produce ATP. And that's, you know, intensity dependent. It's dependent on your physiology and fiber types. But it's not really dependent on body weight. I mean, it's, yeah, to some degree dependent on your muscle mass and your machinery, right?
The ranges and the recommendations, let's say, on average, 30 grams to 90 grams an hour, it's more intensity-based. When you're doing really short rides, that's another situation where it might be a really short ride with VO2 intervals, so maybe you don't need 90 grams an hour, but if you're doing VO2 intervals at the end of a three- or four-hour ride, then...
You know, that's when I would say, yes, you want 90 grams of carbs an hour, even though the first few hours is pretty easy. Yeah. Yeah. And I would also suggest that one of the other things that, I haven't read papers on this, but I've heard smart people tell me, so this is kind of hearsay, but from somewhat trusted sources, that, you know, guts are about
You know, in different ranges of size, like healthy adults, you know, they all absorb, they can absorb about the same amount per hour, like regardless of how big or small you are. Yeah. No, it's true. And, and so that, you know, that's a big reason. And then I think, I know you've talked about this on, I don't know what episodes, but like.
So you have all this, you know, blood glucose now, like where is it going and how do we know that we're using it? I mean, that's the other piece, like you have to be able, well, you don't have to be able to use it, but that's the goal, right? Like if you're taking in 90 grams of carbs an hour, you want to be able to use it, to have better resilience and fatigue resistance and, you know, have all the fuel that you can in the system.
to perform as best as you can. Yeah, and I think that also goes to another thing where it's like, try it and see if it works. Like, if you don't think you need X amount of carbs per hour, just go out and do it and see if you feel better, because I would say 90 to 98% of the time,
When people go out and they eat more on a ride, they feel better regardless of the ride intensity or how long they're going or whatever. Well, I would say not regardless of ride intensity. You know, with hill wraps, you know, God, who can eat? Jeez. They'll just end up on the side of the road anyway. But, you know, like for an endurance ride or threshold intervals or, you know, even a race, it makes such a big difference. Like night and day. Like one of my clients, a pro mountain biker, was...
doing races, and he was fading, like in day three or four, out of a, you know, multi-day stage race, like five, six, seven, something like that, and I was like, well, how much did you beat on the bike? And he's like, well, I think I had three gels. I'm like, yeah, per hour? No, total? Total, total. And I said, all right, tomorrow, get in 100 grams an hour. Just shove it down your face. I don't care if you get enough water, just eat.
As much as you can, and suddenly it turned the whole thing around. And now he goes better, you know, deep into a stage race, as opposed to fading. So yeah, it makes a huge difference. Here's a good question. Does our metabolism actually slow from chronic energy restriction? So, with chronic energy restriction,
I mean, if your metabolism were to slow, you have to be reducing your tissue, right? Your metabolically active tissue. So fat is metabolically active. Muscle is very metabolically active. I mean, everything is. So if you're in this chronic deficit, then yeah, I mean, you're going to downregulate your resting metabolic rate because you're actually in a deficit. So you've lost weight, right? Like you can't just say.
that you're in a chronic energy deficit if you've been the same weight for five years. Yeah. Because if you're actually in a deficit, you're going to lose weight. Yeah. And I think also in the short term versus like in the long and unhealthy term, like this might be a difference too, where in the short term, you might not just want to get up and move around a little bit. Like if you track your steps or something like that, we don't have a lot of great activity trackers or anything like that. I mean, well.
I don't know. Maybe there are some okay ones. But if you track your movement through the day and you track it while you're dieting, like I know for me when I hit like out of a 10-week diet and I hit weeks 7, 8, 9, I am doing nothing as compared to like weeks 1, 2, 3 where I'm like, oh, let's go for a walk and look at the herons out on the pond. It makes a big difference there. And I think
When it comes to like long-term crash diets, you know, like TV show type diets or like movie star type diets, where it's just like, just get to this weight. I don't care what it costs. I don't care, you know, long-term health problems aside, like, because I've had friends who have recovered from like anorexia and they have really bad long-term health problems in terms of like hormones, in terms of like gut function and things like that. So I think we might want to separate those two cases as well.
where there might be some, you know, you know, consequences, like unhealthy consequences there from like really bad crash diets. Yeah, for sure. I mean, what you said about the NEAT though, the non-exercise activity, thermogenesis, that's huge. And I know you mentioned it earlier, so I think we should talk about it real quick, but it's so often people want to blame their metabolism and say, I have a slow metabolism.
But what is really happening, and it's like you said, chronic energy deficit, or even like maybe some people for intermittent energy deficit, you're less active. And so having a step counter is great, just the good old-fashioned step counter, like whatever your Garmin is tracking, you know, steps is a nice, subjective, accurate, pretty accurate way to measure it. And you can see and look at that correlation and say, you know, you might not feel it, but
But the numbers are saying you're being less active because you're eating less. And so it really is that more so than you have a slow metabolism. Yeah. Next question. Actually, I think Herman Ponser did a study in Nature on this where he looked at people's metabolisms.
over the course of their life. And it's like super high when you're an infant, of course, and then it really steadies out until you're about 60 or something like that. And then it starts to actually drop off, like your BMR. So if I think I'm getting that correctly, I've got the book on my shelf somewhere. I have not read it yet, obviously, but that's what I recall. So next question is, why am I not losing belly fat?
Obviously, submitted by a man. Well, statistically submitted by a man. I know it was. But, you know, women can store body fat in different places, too, and so can men, obviously. But, yeah, like, so when it comes to losing fat from different areas of the body, like, how does this work? Yeah, so there's no spot reducing, of course. I think, you know, with...
That kind of fat around the midsection, you know, it's the less desirable type. It's linked to more health issues. Visceral fat. Yeah, yeah. And that's another thing, too. Like, if you're trying to lose body fat or lose weight and you're not seeing it visibly, like...
in your arms, your face or whatever, like you could still be losing visceral fat, which has tremendous health benefits if you need to. But, you know, the belly fat hanging around, that could be related to sleep or stress, maybe. Well, actually, so I've, I just encountered this in one of the textbooks I was reading. They were talking about how in, how this is kind of basically genetically determined.
where some tissues are more active and more in terms of fat uptake or energy uptake to convert to fat and others are less active, which is why some men will get the big belly and some men won't. They'll just kind of get it everywhere. I'm a belly guy, I've noticed. I look basically the same as I did 30 pounds ago, except for my belly is to some degree everything else.
at 220 pounds, I could still flex and see abs. And I was like, oh yeah, I'm not that fat. And then I like turned to the side and I'm like, oh God, what is that? Yeah, I know. Like, unfortunately, that's just one of those things that, you know, you could spend so much time and effort to try to, to make that smaller or go away, but it's like you said, genetically predetermined. And I think.
So overall, like if you're healthy and at a healthy body fat percentage, it's just kind of, you know, at some point it's good to just practice body acceptance, I think. Yeah. Yeah, for sure. I mean, and this is, I think, you know, this is something that I hear from women sometimes is like, oh God, she's got abs. She must be so unhealthy. It's like, well, maybe yes, maybe no. Maybe she just doesn't have fat there.
Because, you know, women on average will store more around the hips and thighs and all that kind of stuff, on average anyway. Yeah. The lesson is don't compare your body to someone else's, right? Yes. Or your training or anything. Yeah. Do what's right for you. I spend a lot of time talking to people about this kind of stuff. A lot of time. Should endurance athletes be worried about insulin resistance?
Yeah, I know. I mean, obviously, I know why you're asking that question. I think everyone needs to be aware of it in, you know, in the grand scheme of things. But, you know, when athletes, endurance athletes, eat a higher carbohydrate diet, and we're always emphasizing carbs, it's to support what you're doing. It's to support the workload and the output. And so, should you be worried about it? Well, it's less likely that you'll become insulin resistant.
with while you're doing the training. Because one, glucose uptake is insulin independent when the muscle is active. So, you know, you'll take up glucose from the bloodstream without needing insulin, basically. And that's true also for a short period after you're done riding or exercising. The glycogen window.
Yeah, that magic glycogen window is actually the first stage of it is insulin independent. And so that's why it's a great time to, you know, take advantage of that. You can eat fast-absorbing carbs during that window, not need to release insulin or much insulin. But then also after that, like, you are actually
And the reason the window is longer than 30 to 60 minutes is you're actually more insulin sensitive as a result of the exercise for, I don't know, like 12 to 48 hours afterwards on average. So you can eat carbohydrates, especially if you're riding more than, you know, one or two days a week. If you're riding most days a week, then you're kind of always in this state of...
being more insulin sensitive. Now, if you get injured or you take a long break, I think that goes away pretty fast. So it is something that you want to be aware of. And that's why I go back to sustainable habits and making good food choices. So not being reliant on your training and how many hours you're riding to eat whatever you want and not caring about what you're eating. So if you're eating everything out of a package,
And everything has sugar. Regardless of how much you're riding, you want to educate yourself on what are better sources of food that are healthier. So if anything, I mean, at some point, you're going to have to, you know, be off the bike for whatever reason. And so that's when you want to not go low carb, but choose.
Better Sources of Carbs, so Complex Carbohydrates, like, you know, whole grains and vegetables, for example. Yeah, things with fiber that are filling, that have a lot of water content, like that have micronutrients and stuff like that. Yeah. So, and they're, yeah, and those are also hugely filling. So, you know, I don't know why people wouldn't want to eat vegetables, and they're delicious. They're just, they're just great. Like, like, a cold sandwich with like a little lettuce and tomato is like,
It's like a dream of heaven for me, just having a good sandwich with vegetables. So good. So why – next question, sorry. Why can't we just only replace carbs after a ride? I love your answer. Like, yeah, you can. Go for it. No, but – so when we talked about – earlier, we talked about the macronutrient ranges.
for carbs, proteins, and fats. There are ranges and there are recommendations for a reason because each macronutrient has a different purpose. So you can only replace carbs after a ride. I would say it might be harder to meet your protein needs throughout the day if you're not getting in protein after the ride. And so I like to look at everything and kind of like, okay, one,
Step one, are we meeting our daily needs? And if so, then okay, that's good. It's not as important. But then I also, like as a performance nutritionist, I want to kind of optimize everything we can. So could there be a benefit of taking in 20 to 40 grams of protein after a ride in the context of your whole day?
Yeah, there could be, especially if you're in the middle of a hard training block or you're an older athlete or you are recovering from being sick or injured or whatever. Like, yeah, carbs is probably the most important thing when it comes to glycogen restoration, but protein is an important nutrient as well. Yeah, and like I mentioned earlier, after endurance training, there is...
Protein Synthesis in the Muscles. And so one of the studies that I found was looking at the protein synthesis versus protein breakdown rate after endurance training. And people who didn't take in any protein, it basically remained even, where breakdown rate and synthesis rate were roughly equivalent, whereas people who were having protein plus carbs, I think the control group was only carbs.
They had a greater rate of protein synthesis than just baseline. And so I always like to think about it in practical terms too, where if you leave all your protein for one meal, like I eat anywhere from 180 to 200 grams of protein per day. I cannot imagine having to eat that much chicken in one sitting. There's no amount of cheese that would like help either. No.
No, and that goes back to your total daily protein needs. I mean, research shows that it's best and most effectively utilized if it's taken in over somewhat even doses throughout the day versus not eating protein for most of the day and then eating a bunch at once. And so, again, if you're wanting to...
kind of optimize everything you can. And especially in the context of today's topic, like your body is not going to know what to do with 150 grams of protein at once. So it might use some of it and then... Yeah, it's going to just like de-eminate the rest and just like shove the carbon chains like wherever else they need to go. Yeah. And also, I think that it's important to consider the fact that some proteins cannot be synthesized in the body.
And, you know, we can think about it just in terms of nitrogen intake, because proteins have nitrogens in them, and carbohydrates and fats don't. And so there are some, you know, essential proteins, et cetera, et cetera, and some, you know, there are some essential fats, but there's basically, when it comes to energy intake and replacing what you've burned, carbohydrates can become fat.
How does fat become carbohydrates? And how does all this stuff work? And how are they interlinked? And so if you think, oh, I only burned this many carbs for this ride, as if anybody could actually know that accurately, the error bar is going to be quite large on that number.
You know, you are going to just have empty fat cells sitting around that are going to get partially filled. Your glycogen stores are only going to get partially filled. And you're just going to be hungry and tired and like having shit workouts, frankly. Yeah, yeah. So next question is, can we lose fat while gaining muscle? I feel like this is more of like a bodybuilder and like casual athlete type question, but.
Yeah, like, so typically I think this is called a recomp diet. Yeah. So is this really a thing in the, like, is this like a short-term thing, or can this actually happen for like months to a year, or is it more effective to periodize like muscle gain and weight loss, fat loss? Yeah, it definitely is something that comes up more, I think, with bodybuilding and physique athletes, but. Well, there are a number of vein cyclists out there who want, you know, biceps or whatever. Well, sure, and like.
You know, you think about how difficult this is. Like, if you could do everything at the same time, that would be ideal. But one is catabolic and one is anabolic. So in one scenario, to lose weight, wherever it's coming from, you need to be in an energy deficit. And in the other one, to accrue mass, you need to be in an energy surplus. So it's really hard. I mean, I will say it's much...
Or it's less hard for people who have more to lose or relatively untrained with higher body weight, body fat. I think you can do that. If you're truly looking on putting on mass, right? Now, can you get stronger and be in an energy deficit? Yeah, you can. Because there's multiple ways to be stronger or to put out more power.
So you can do that, but in terms of like truly like putting on mass versus losing mass, I would say you have to periodize that. Yeah, I fully agree. I think that a lot of the times that this kind of stuff comes from people who just start getting into the gym, or actually there are probably studies out there showing that this is a thing in untrained people.
And one of the dirty secrets in the scientific literature, well, not to you and me, but to probably at least a few of our listeners, is that hypertrophy, a lot of the time in the literature, is literally just you put a measuring tape around the same spot on somebody's thigh or bicep or, you know, whatever, and you just see if the muscle is getting bigger or smaller. And, you know, you can do DEXA scans or whatever, but, you know, when you do all that stuff,
It's just counting, like, the raw size of the muscle. We're not talking about adding myofibrils. We're not talking about adding actual contractile units. We're talking about, like, swelling, like glycogen stores and stuff like that. So, you know, in the very short term, in the course of a couple months, it seems like, yeah, this is very much a thing. But yeah, I agree. In the long term, it's something that absolutely needs to be periodized. Yeah, and I think when, you know, when we see athletes wanting to lose weight, ultimately...
They just want to get faster. I mean, they want their FTP to go up. They want their TCE to go up. They want their results. And they want to lose weight. So, yeah, you can do that. But again, like, you're probably not going to put on a significant amount of muscle mass. And, you know, it's going to be a slow process. And if you have not very much to lose, it's going to be very slow. All right. Well, so why don't we flip this question on its head, too, now. Is it possible?
to get aerobically faster while losing weight. Yeah. I mean, I think we see that all the time. Yeah, we do. I mean, yeah, in our clients, yeah, we definitely see that. I would say one of the things that I've noticed is higher intensity stuff like Vietta Max training and, you know, any kind of anaerobic training like hill reps, like capacity stuff, like sprints.
These things are actually much harder to get faster at while you're in a decent caloric deficit because the recovery time gets a lot longer. And so this is something that would need to be considered. But typically, and I said this in the Size Versus Power podcast, which I think was Wattstock 42.
Unless you're extremely, extremely slim, is not going to limit aerobic power. Most people have enough muscle mass where they can push 400 watts if they could aerobically supply that. And so we're talking about heart stroke volume as opposed to muscle mass. And so if you're working that stuff aerobically, yeah, and especially since the protein synthesis rates are actually lower than with strength training.
It's a lot easier to build mitochondria and capillary density and stuff like that because the rates are lower. So you can actually have enough energy to do that while you are dieting and training aerobically. Yeah. Lots of high-intensity stuff in my experience. Yeah. No, you're right. I mean, you know, I'm one of those people that doesn't – I'm never going to have a lot of muscle mass, but I can still do the training as long as I have the fuel.
If, so, I think the key there is to make sure that, again, like, you're getting in the carbohydrate availability, so before, during, and after the rides, and you're recovering well, and, like, doing everything else right, so you can do the training, and then the training is what is going to drive that adaptation, you know, the endurance adaptations. And so,
You have to be, again, pretty strategic with the deficit and when and how you're creating that deficit, but it's certainly possible. Actually, I have another athlete who is not your client, but one of your coach's clients, and the week I started working with him, his coach wanted him to start his VO2 block, and he's like, uh-oh, what should we do?
Should we delay starting to work together? I was like, no, let's figure this out. And so I didn't put him in a calorie deficit to start. Of course, I'm guessing too. I don't have all of this data at my fingertips. But my guidance was not to try to be losing anything, but it was very focused on carbohydrate intake to support his VO2.
Block, all his workouts and his recovery. I think he's doing two-a-days too. So it's carb-focused, adequate protein, again, in that range I talked about earlier, and enough fat, but not fat-focused. And so, you know, he actually nailed the block. I mean, he was super happy. He couldn't believe it. But he also lost weight. And so here's the thing.
It's not because I had him eating in a calorie deficit. I think based on where he was starting from, he probably was eating too much, too much, like more fat and less carbohydrate and was kind of nervous about doing the training. But when we changed the focus of how to fuel, he was more focused on getting in the carbs to support the effort that he needed to do and recover from day to day.
And he probably just didn't eat as many fat calories as he used to. So whatever, like that change was from before he started working with me to after, you know, now his weight is stabilized, but for the first couple of weeks, he did lose a few pounds. So yeah, I mean, it's, it's, you can, it's not something I ever intend to do during a high intensity phase, as you know, you know, from working together. Yep. Yep.
Okay, last question. By the way, we only covered like 20-25% of the questions that we got, so thank you everybody for submitting these. I had to kind of cull them a little bit because some of them were silly, some of them were kind of off topic, and some of them were basically asking about things like, you know...
Does breathing, how we breathe affect this based on some guy's book? And it's like, no, of course not. So, okay, the last question, I really like this one. Do you have any tips to find a good nutritionist or dietitian? Also, what's the difference between a nutritionist and a dietitian? Well, a dietitian is someone who actually has the credentials. Anyone can call themselves a nutritionist, just like anyone can call themselves a coach. But yeah, I am a dietitian.
There, I would definitely, wherever you live, look for somebody who is a dietician in sports, you know, has familiarity with working with endurance athletes. Those are few and far between, by the way. They are, I know. So, I mean, you can always reach out to me, and if I don't have the availability, I can recommend somebody to you. I do.
You know that I run an Instagram account with my friend Kelly who Inside Sports Nutrition, it's great. Yeah, Inside Sports Nutrition, right. And so Kelly is a phenomenal dietitian and professor. She's a PhD as well. So she works more so with runners, but still, you know, she gets it. And then we have been working with some of her graduate students who are registered dietitians.
Um, so if you're looking for someone who, you don't necessarily need a lot of, like, complex, you know, uh, coaching, I guess, from a nutrition standpoint, and you just need a little bit of direction. Not a lot of complex day-to-day guidance or something like that, like, uh, but you can do the, you know, the simple consult and recommendations, too. Sure, yeah. Yeah. Um, I, actually, I, we, um, you know, I'm, I'm curious, what's the breakdown between, like, the, the take rate for
People who want like, you know, individualized nutrition, like, and how many people just kind of like want it for like a month or two just to kind of get into the habit and then, you know, kind of like I've coached people who for a couple months and they go, okay, great, I think I can take this from here. So like, how does that, what's more common for you? I mean, that's really my preference. So I think it's more common because I steer people in that direction. Like, I don't want you to need me forever. Like, that doesn't make sense for me. It's not like.
Yeah, I mean, my, I take like a, the approach of, I want to teach you how to listen to your body and to teach you how to fuel yourself so you know how to do this on your own. Where, coaching's a little bit different. I mean, like, you want, I think that you, I don't think that you can get the most out of yourself if you're going to be self-coached forever. I really don't. I think it's valuable to have a coach for your training long-term.
For someone like me as a nutritionist, you know, I think having a one to three months of guidance maybe, or then like taking off and implementing what you've learned, and then maybe like at a different point in your season, coming back for another consult or something to kind of like fine tune or change it up. So like, for example, off-season versus base training versus, you know, race time. Yeah, versus how do I get through Thanksgiving and the holidays?
Yeah, I mean, athletes are, you know, are people too. And it's not just about fueling. You've got to learn how to enjoy food for, you know, its other benefits too, other than fuel. And so restricting around the holidays and, you know, being kind of a bummer around your family is not recommended. But again, I go back to it all comes down to good decision making. Like, don't go crazy, but enjoy yourself.
Yeah, everything in moderation, including moderation. Yeah, it's so boring, right? It's boring. But sometimes boring is the right way to move forward. Because I think one of the things that I enjoy most with my clients is predictability. Like if somebody's training is inconsistent or something is not predictable, if there's an element of chaos where it's like, I don't know if...
I don't know exactly where they're at right now. You know, whether it could be communication, could be nutrition, could be like life stress, could be relationship troubles, could be work stress, who knows, you know, that kind of stuff. It's when it really affects the bike, it, you know, it causes, you know, it's a big variable to try to account for. And, you know, especially with with nutrition and diet, you know, that's something that could be.
You know, taken care of with a little bit of focus and attention. Absolutely. I mean, 100% agree. Yeah. All right. Do you have any final thoughts before we wrap this up officially? Gosh, I don't think so. We covered a lot. Those are great questions. Yeah. Yeah. So thanks to all of our listeners. Where can people find you? Where can they get in touch?
The easiest place if you're on social media is at Namrita Brooke. And then if you want free nutrition content, it's at Inside Sports Nutrition. And my profile is linked there too. So yeah, I mean, I have a website too, but it's linked in my profile. Yeah. And that's Brooke with an E, in case anybody's curious. All right. Thank you, Namrita. Thank you.
All right, everybody. Thank you again for listening, and we really appreciate you listening to the podcast and sharing it. And of course, this is going to be a good one to share if you'd like to do so.
But I strongly encourage you all to follow Inside Sports Nutrition. We'll have links up at empiricalcycling.com under the podcast episodes for the show notes here. And follow Namrita and get in touch with her if you would like. She is a cycling coach. She is a really excellent dietitian. And of course, as you just heard, if she doesn't have space, she will, of course, refer you to her Inside Sports Nutrition co-
host person, I don't know exactly what to call her, Kelly Pritchett, who's also, I'm sure, just as excellent, especially if you're a runner and a triathlete, good place to reach out. So, yeah, everybody, thank you always, as always, for listening. Thank you for the great questions. Empirical Cycling on Instagram, that's me. Of course, Weekend AMA is up in the Instagram stories.
And actually, as I record this, I actually have to go finish up a couple more. So if you missed it, just ask next weekend or just slide into my DMs or just send me an email. Of course, if you're looking for a coach or you would like to consult on anything, you can hire us for any of that. So just shoot me an email, empiricalcycling at gmail.com. And of course, if you have any other questions or comments, just please let me know. And thank you all for listening, and we'll see you next time.